Added kubernetes job support development documentation (#6560)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/development/core/kubernetes-job-support.md

> # Kubernetes Job Support

Reviewer: Maybe change this (and the corresponding mkdocs.yml entry, and the file name) to something like "Minikube Dev Environment for k8s Jobs"?

# Kubernetes Job Support

> Kubernetes Job Support is added in Nautobot v2.4.0. This documentation is a end-to-end development guide on topics from how to set up your local kubernetes cluster with [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/) and how to run a nautobot job in a remote kubernetes job pod.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kubernetes Job Support is added in Nautobot v2.4.0. This documentation is a end-to-end development guide on topics from how to set up your local Kubernetes cluster with [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/) and how to run a Nautobot Job in a Kubernetes job pod.
```

🚜  Pulling base image v0.0.45 ...
🏃  Updating the running docker "minikube" container ...
🐳  Preparing Kubernetes v1.31.0 on Docker 27.2.0 ...
🔎  Verifying Kubernetes components...
    ▪ Using image gcr.io/k8s-minikube/storage-provisioner:v5
🌟  Enabled addons: storage-provisioner, default-storageclass
🏄  Done! kubectl is now configured to use "minikube" cluster and "default" namespace by default
```

Next we need [`kubectl`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/) to interact with the new cluster we just created. See [Kubernetes official documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl) on how to download `kubectl` for your respective operating system.

Once you have `kubectl` downloaded and installed, run the following command to ensure the version you installed is up-to-date:

```bash
kubectl version --client
```

You should see the following output:

```bash
Client Version: v1.31.2
Kustomize Version: v5.4.2
```

We also need to check if our default service account is enabled to create jobs, we can check the permission by executing the following command:

```bash
kubectl auth can-i --as=system:serviceaccount:default:default create jobs -n default
```

> If the output from the above command is yes, then you are all good to go. However, if the output is no, then we need to create a rolebinding to grant the default user appropriate permissions. We can achieve this by running the following command:

Reviewer: Perhaps?
```suggestion
If the output from the above command is `yes`, then you are all good to go. However, if the output is `no`, then you will need to create a role binding to grant the default user appropriate permissions. You can achieve this by running the following command:
```

```bash
kubectl create rolebinding admin-namespace-default-new --clusterrole=admin --serviceaccount=default:default --namespace=default
```

> This command will assign the admin role to our default serviceaccount in the namespace `default`. Check out kubernetes [RBAC authorization page](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/) to learn how to create more granular role and permission assignments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This command will assign the admin role to your default service account in the namespace `default`. Check out Kubernetes [RBAC authorization page](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/rbac/) to learn how to create more granular role and permission assignments.
```

> We can run the `kubectl auth can-i --as=system:serviceaccount:default:default create jobs -n default` again and this time the output should be yes.

Reviewer: Can we change from mixed "we/you" wording to "you" consistently throughout this file?

```suggestion
You can run the `kubectl auth can-i --as=system:serviceaccount:default:default create jobs -n default` again and this time the output should be `yes`.
```

```

You can confirm the health of the deployment by running the following command:

```bash
kubectl get deployments
```

You should see the following output:

```bash
NAME          READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
celery-beat   1/1     1            1           12m
db            1/1     1            1           12m
nautobot      1/1     1            1           12m
redis         1/1     1            1           14m
```

To start all services:

```bash
kubectl apply -f "development/kubernetes/*-service.yaml"
```

You should see the following output:

```bash
service/db created
service/nautobot created
service/redis created
```

You can confirm the health of the each service by running the following command:

```bash
kubectl get services
```

You should see the following output:

```bash
NAME            TYPE        CLUSTER-IP       EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)    AGE
db              ClusterIP   10.111.0.30      <none>        5432/TCP   12m
kubernetes      ClusterIP   10.96.0.1        <none>        443/TCP    12m
nautobot        ClusterIP   10.106.32.53     <none>        8080/TCP   12m
redis           ClusterIP   10.102.99.143    <none>        6379/TCP   12m
```

> ### Starting the Configuration Maps and Persistent Volumn Claims

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Starting the Configuration Maps and Persistent Volume Claims
```

service/db           ClusterIP   10.111.0.30     <none>        5432/TCP   30m
service/kubernetes   ClusterIP   10.96.0.1       <none>        443/TCP    30m
service/nautobot     ClusterIP   10.106.32.53    <none>        8080/TCP   30m
service/redis        ClusterIP   10.102.99.143   <none>        6379/TCP   30m

NAME                          READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
deployment.apps/celery-beat   1/1     1            1           30m
deployment.apps/db            1/1     1            1           30m
deployment.apps/nautobot      1/1     1            1           30m
deployment.apps/redis         1/1     1            1           30m
```

### Port Forward to Local Host

We can use the `port-forward` command from `kubectl` to make your Nautobot instance on the kubernetes cluster accessible in `localhost:8080`:

```bash
kubectl port-forward <nautobot-pod-name> 8080:8080
```

The output should be:

```bash
Forwarding from 127.0.0.1:8080 -> 8080
Forwarding from [::1]:8080 -> 8080
Handling connection for 8080
```

Now go to your web browser and navigate to `localhost:8080`. You should see your Nautobot instance running.

> ![K8s Nautobot Login](../../img/kubernetes/k8s_nautobot_login.png)

Reviewer: Our image files in the docs are in several different directories already but I'd rather we not add more files to `docs/img`. Would you mind moving these to `docs/media/development/core/kubernetes/` instead?

![K8s Job Edit Button](../../img/kubernetes/k8s_job_edit_button.png)

Check the override default value checkbox on the `Job Queues` field and select the kubernetes job queue from the dropdown.
Check the override default value checkbox on the `Default Job Queue` field and select the kubernetes job queue from the dropdown.

![K8s Job Edit](../../img/kubernetes/k8s_job_edit.png)

Click on the update button when we are finished.

### Run the Job

After clicking on the update button after the previous step, we should be redirected to the table of jobs. Click on the link that says "Export Object List". This should take us to the Job Run Form.

![K8s Run Job](../../img/kubernetes/k8s_run_job.png)

Select an option for the Content Type field dropdown and notice that the Job queue is already filled out with the kubernetes job queue that we assigned to this job from previous steps. So we do not need to make any changes there.

![K8s Run Job Form](../../img/kubernetes/k8s_job_run_form.png)

Click on the "Run Job Now" button and we should be directed to the job result page.

![K8s Job Result Pending](../../img/kubernetes/k8s_job_result_pending.png)

### Inspect the Job Result

> You can inspect the job result and the job logs in this page. Notice the two job log entries that reads something like "Creating job pod (pod-name) in namespace default" and Reading job pod (pod-name) in namespace default". Those entries indicate that a Kubernetes Job pod was executing the job for us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can inspect the job result and the job logs in this page. Notice the two job log entries that reads something like "Creating job pod (pod-name) in namespace default" and "Reading job pod (pod-name) in namespace default". Those entries indicate that a Kubernetes Job pod was executing the job for us.
```

```bash
NAME                           READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
celery-beat-6fb67477b7-rsw62   1/1     Running   0          10m
db-8687b48964-gtvtc            1/1     Running   0          10m
nautobot-679bdc765-pl2ld       1/1     Running   0          10m
redis-7cc58577c-tl5sq          1/1     Running   0          10m
```

we can run the command `kubectl logs <celery-beat-pod-name> -f` and you should see the following output or something similar:

```bash
LocalTime -> 2024-11-20 18:49:41
Configuration ->
    . broker -> redis://:**@redis:6379/0
    . loader -> celery.loaders.app.AppLoader
    . scheduler -> nautobot.core.celery.schedulers.NautobotDatabaseScheduler

    . logfile -> [stderr]@%INFO
    . maxinterval -> 5.00 seconds (5s)
[2024-11-20 18:49:41,161: INFO/MainProcess] beat: Starting...
```

> Open another terminal and execute the command `kubectl exec --stdin --tty <nautobot-pod-name> -- /bin/bash` and run `nautobot-server nbshell`. We are going to create a new Scheduled Export Object List Job.

Reviewer: Can we do this one through the UI as well?

schedule_job.save()
```

To confirm that the Scheduled Job is running, we go back to the terminal that was logging celery beat. You should see the following logs or something similar:

```bash
[2024-11-21 02:09:57,756: INFO/MainProcess] DatabaseScheduler: Schedule changed.
[2024-11-21 02:09:57,774: INFO/MainProcess] Scheduler: Sending due task Export Object List Hourly_85413d3f-1342-4adf-8d80-11e740ebb907 (nautobot.extras.jobs.run_job)
02:09:57.782 INFO    nautobot.extras.utils utils.py        run_kubernetes_job_and_return_job_result() :
  Creating job pod nautobot-job in namespace default
[2024-11-21 02:09:57,782: INFO/MainProcess] Creating job pod nautobot-job in namespace default
02:09:57.802 INFO    nautobot.extras.utils utils.py        run_kubernetes_job_and_return_job_result() :
  Reading job pod nautobot-job in namespace default
[2024-11-21 02:09:57,802: INFO/MainProcess] Reading job pod nautobot-job in namespace default
[2024-11-21 02:09:57,837: INFO/MainProcess] DatabaseScheduler: Schedule changed.
```

You can also confirm if the job is running or is completed by running `kubectl get jobs` and `kubectl get pods` in another terminal.

> Go back to your broswer and click on the Job Results entry from the Jobs navigation menu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go back to your browser and click on the Job Results entry from the Jobs navigation menu.
```

# Kubernetes Job Support

Kubernetes Job Support is added in Nautobot v2.4.0. This documentation is a end-to-end development guide on topics from how to set up your local kubernetes cluster with [minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/) and how to run a nautobot job in a remote kubernetes job pod.

> ## Preliminary Setup

Reviewer 2: It would be great to have `invoke` command to run all checks from this step and `Check Required Files` like permissions, kubectl installed, presence of required files. But it's more like feature request for future or some hackaton :)

> First we need to install minikube, go to the offical [get started page](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/start/?arch=%2Fmacos%2Farm64%2Fstable%2Fbinary+download) to learn how to download minikube.

Reviewer: Looks like that URL is specific to mac/arm64 users - maybe replace with something more generic?

Run the following command to point your terminal to use the docker daemon inside minikube. This will ensure that your up-to-date local image named `local/nautobot-final-dev:local-py${PYTHON_VER}` is used when we build our kubernetes deployments.

```bash
eval $(minikube docker-env)
```

Now you can build your nautobot image locally using the `invoke build` command. After the build is complete, we are ready to build our kubernetes deployments.

### Starting the Deployments and Services

Once you have confirmed that you have all the files listed above. We can start the required deployments and services:

To start all deployments:

```bash
kubectl apply -f "development/kubernetes/*-deployment.yaml"
```

You should see the following output:

```bash
deployment.apps/celery-beat created
deployment.apps/db created
deployment.apps/nautobot created
deployment.apps/redis created
```

> You can confirm the health of the each deployment by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can confirm the health of the deployment by running the following command:
```

deployment.apps/redis         1/1     1            1           30m
```

## Environment Variables and Job Pod Manifest

## Running Jobs

To pass stdin into the nautobot container that exists with in the nautobot pod, first you need to get the name of the nautobot pod.

You can execute the following command to see all the pods.

```bash
kubectl get pods
```

You should see the following output and note that the pod with the prefix `nautobot-*`. That is what we need for our command.

```bash
NAME                               READY   STATUS    RESTARTS      AGE
pod/celery-beat-6fb67477b7-rsw62   1/1     Running   0             30m
pod/db-8687b48964-gtvtc            1/1     Running   0             30m
pod/nautobot-679bdc765-pl2ld       1/1     Running   0             30m
pod/redis-7cc58577c-tl5sq          1/1     Running   0             30m
```

Now to get to the CLI of the nautobot container in the pod, we execute the following command:

```bash
kubectl exec --stdin --tty <nautobot-pod-name> -- /bin/bash
```

You should see that we are inside the container as the root user:

```bash
root@nautobot-679bdc765-pl2ld:/source#
```

### Create and Assign a Kubernetes Job Queue to a Job

> Now we are inside the container, we can access `nbshell` using `nautobot-server nbshell` and make modifications to our database records. You should see the following output:

Reviewer: Do we not have the ability to connect to the k8s deployment with a web browser rather than needing to do all the below through nbshell? I would have thought that should "just work" given the nautobot pod is publishing port 8080.

```py
# Django version 4.2.16
# Nautobot version 2.4.0a1
# Example Nautobot App version 1.0.0
Python 3.11.10 (main, Nov 12 2024, 22:19:37) [GCC 12.2.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
(InteractiveConsole)
>>>
```

In order to run kubernetes jobs, we need to create a [Job Queue](../../user-guide/platform-functionality/jobs/jobqueue.md) with type Kubernetes.

```py
>>> from nautobot.extras.choices import JobQueueTypeChoices

> >>> jq = JobQueue.objects.create(name="kubernetes", queue_type=JobQueueTypeChoices.TYPE_KUBERNETES)

Reviewer 2: It would be nice to have a possibility to directly copy the example code and paste it into a console without a need to remove the `>>>` signs. Maybe add code without it and screenshot of command run in your terminal? :thinking: 

The same goes to the code below with `Job` creating code and `curl` command - but there it's even more important because there is more to copy :D

Author: Moved these to UI screenshots

```

we can run the command `kubectl logs <celery-beat-pod-name> -f` and you should see the following output or something similar:

```bash
LocalTime -> 2024-11-20 18:49:41
Configuration ->
    . broker -> redis://:**@redis:6379/0
    . loader -> celery.loaders.app.AppLoader
    . scheduler -> nautobot.core.celery.schedulers.NautobotDatabaseScheduler

    . logfile -> [stderr]@%INFO
    . maxinterval -> 5.00 seconds (5s)
[2024-11-20 18:49:41,161: INFO/MainProcess] beat: Starting...
```

Open another terminal and execute the command `kubectl exec --stdin --tty <nautobot-pod-name> -- /bin/bash` and run `nautobot-server nbshell`. We are going to create a new Scheduled Export Object List Job.

First we import all the required packages:

```py
>>> from nautobot.extras.choices import JobExecutionType
>>> from datetime import datetime
>>> from zoneinfo import ZoneInfo
```

Then we can create the Scheduled Job

```py
>>> ScheduledJob.objects.create(name="Export Object List Hourly", task="nautobot.core.jobs.ExportObjectList", job_model=Job.objects.ge
t(name="Export Object List"), interval=JobExecutionType.TYPE_HOURLY, user=User.objects.first(), approval_required=False, start_time=da

> tetime.now(ZoneInfo("America/New_York")), time_zone=ZoneInfo("America/New_York"), job_queue=JobQueue.objects.get(name="kubernetes"), kwargs={"content_type": 1})

Reviewer: Odd line wrapping here?

Reviewer 2: Probably because it should be ready to copy & paste into own terminal. But yea, approach with creating an object and asserting values line by line would be more readable :) 
```
scheduled_job = ScheduledJob()
scheduled_job.name = "..."
```
